





COMPUTER SYSTEM




I  I INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER SYSTEM
A computer is an electronic device that can be programmed to accept data (input), process it and 
generate result (output). A computer along with additional hardware and software together is called 
a computer system.
A computer system primarily comprises   entral processing unit {CPU), memory, input/out    ices and 
storage devices. All these compon   fun  n together as a single unit to deliver the  ir   tput. A 
computer system comes in variou  or   nd sizes. It can vary from a high-end server    ona  esktop, 
laptop, tablet computer, or a s   h  e.
Figure 1.1 shows the bloc diagram  a comput system. The directed lines e  sen  he flow o and signal 
between the  mp  e
“A computcr would dcscrvc to bc fallcd mtclligcnt i it

Se  ary Storage  ices





Input Device
Primary Memory

Control



Output Device


»  /nfroducfion to Computer System


Arithmetic  c Unit (AL

entr Processing it (CPU)
Figure    o  orients of a computer system

1.1.1 Ce  1 Processing Unit {CPU}
It is th   c   c circuitry of a computer that carries out t  ac a1 processing and usually referred 
as the br  o   computer. It is commonly called processor
o.  sically, a CPU can be placed on one or more m  ochips called integrated circuits (IC). The ICs 
com rise semiconductor materials.

2021-22

»  Computer Memory
»  Data Transfer between Memory rind CPU
»  Dntn rind
Information
»  Microproce:ssors
»  !Software
»  Operntinp Sy:Stem


COMPUTER SCIE;NCE; — CLASS XI






Keyboard



Mouse




Scanner




Touch Screen


Figure 1.2: Input devices












Display monitor




Speaker









printer

Figure 1.3: Output devices
The CPU is given instructions and data through programs. The CPU then fetches the program and data 
from the memory and performs arithmetic and logic operations as per the given instructions and 
stores the result back to memory.
While processing, the CPU stores the data as well as instructions in its local memory called 
registers. Registers are part of the CPU chip and they are limited in size and number. Different 
registers are used for storing data, instructions or intermediate results.
Other than the registers, the CPU has two m components — Arithmetic Logic Unit (ALU) and Con Unit 
(CU). ALU performs all the arithmetic operations that need to  done as per the inst   n i program. 
CU contro  equential inst  cti  e c ion, interprets instructi  s   guides d a    o gh the 
computer's me   AL   d input  o   devices. CPU is also p p     wn as mi    es or. We will study mor 
 o t  ’n section
1. 1.2   u  ev‘  s
The  vices t  ough whic  o  o1 signals are sent t      er are t  e  a  input devices. These vi  
convert the in     into a digital form that is
c   le by the o  u  system. Some examples of in  t devices i     board, mouse, scanner, touch 
screen, etc., as  own in Figure 1.2. Specially designed braille ke boards re also available to help 
the visually impair   entering data into a computer. Besides, we can no   t  data through voice, 
for example, we can oice search to search the web where we can
in  t  search string through our voice.
D  a entered through input device is temporarily tored in the main memory (also called RAM) of the 
omputer system. For permanent storage and future use, the data as well as instructions are stored 
permanently in additional storage locations called secondary memory.
1. 1.3 Output Devices
The device that receives data from a computer system for display, physical production, etc., is 
called output device. It converts digital information into human- understandable form. For example, 
monitor, projector, headphone, speaker, printer, etc. Some output devices

2021-22


C OMPUTDR SYSTEM

are shown in Figure 1.3. A braille display monitor is useful for a visually challenged person to 
understand the textual output generated by computers.
A printer is the most commonly used device to get output in physical {hardcopy) form. Three types 
of  in commonly used printers are inkjet, laserjet and dot matrix. Now-a-days, there is a new type 
of printer

called 3D-printer, which is used to build physical replica of a digital 3D design. These printers 
are being used in manufacturing industries to create prototypes of products. Their usage is also 
being explored in the medical field, particularly for developing body organs.

1. 2 EvocuTION OF COMPUTER
From the simple calculator to a modern day  werful data processor, computing devices have e  ve  ‘n 
a relatively short span of time. The evolutio   mp  g devices in shown through a timeline in   r
A punched card is a
iece of stiff paper that stores digital data in the form of holes at predefined positions.



PaSca/ine
Blaize Pascal invented a mechanical calculator known as Pascal calculator or Pascaline to do 
addition and subtraction of two numbers directly and multiplication and division th  gh
repeated addition and subtractio
ED VAC/ ENIA
Joh Von Neuman  tro  ed he concept of store  ogr
computer whic was c  le of storing data as  as p  am in the me   Th   C and then th  IA  mpu ers 
were develop  ased  this concept.


tin9 Machine erman Hollerith des' n tabulating machi fo
su marising the d  tore on the punched car  is considered to be the
step towa  rogramming.

Integrated Circuit
An Integrated Circuit (IC) is a silicon chip which contains entire electronic circuit on a very 
small area. The size of computer drastically reduced
because of ICs.

0                        1970


1834                       1947





500 BC
In  tic £n9irte
C  les  bage invented
cal engine, a
ech ical computing device
putting, processing, storing and displaying the output, which is considered to form the basis of 
modern
computers.
Transistor Vacuum tubes were
replaced by transistors
1937     developed at Bell Labs,
using semiconductor
materials.


Furirtg Mnchirte

Compu  g is a ibuted to v    ABACUS
m  30  ears ago. It was a  chanical device
pable of doing simple ari  etic calculations only.
The Turing machine concept was a general purpose programmable machine that was capable of solving 
any problem by executing the program stored on the punched cards.
fipure 2.4: Timeline shominy key inventions in computing technology

2021-22


COMPUTER S CIDNCD — CLASS XI









Central
The Von Neumann architecture is shown in Figure
1.5. It consists of a Central Processing Unit (CPU) for processing arithmetic and logical 
instructions, a memory to store data and programs, input and output
devices  and  communication
channels to send or receive the


Input
Processing Unit


Memory
Output  O t]3ut data. Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer (ENIAC) is the first binary 
programmable

Figure 1.!5: hon Neumann architecture for
the computer
computer based on Von Neuma architecture.
During the 1970s, Large Scale Integrati electronic circuits all wed integration of   p
CPU on a single chi  called microproces     re's Law predicted ex  n  ia1 growth       mber
In 1965,Intel co-    Of transistors    con  be asse  ie  ‘n   single founder Gordon Moore   
lTllCFOChlp. In 1      rocessin     o  omputers
introduced Moore's    increased   o e  11y by inte   in  ro nd 3 million

Law which predicted that the number of transistors on a chip
compose       mall—size  c    rmed as Very Large  cale    ation (VL    th r advancement in
would double every two   tech  logy h  made it f  ‘b   abricate high density

years while the costs would be halved.





x  10,000,00 ,  0
Q  1,000,000,000
o   a    s and   er  omponents (approx 106 ents) on a      called Super Large Scale
eg  ion (SLSI  s  w   Figure 1.6.
M introd  e   rst personal computer {PC) for the home user i  981 and Apple introduced Macintosh


Core 2 DUO  Core i7

o  100,000,000
U   10,000,000
Int Microprocessors
Pentium II
Pentium IV
Pentium III

1,000,00
100,0
O

Invention of the Transistor
’486 Pentium
’486
’386
286

00

10   ...-’’’’’
8086
.-" 4004

Doubles every 2 years
l     “““                    i    i
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020

igure 1.6: Exponential increase in number of transistors need in ICT over time


2021-22


Computer SyStem    5

machines in 1984. The popularity of the PC surged by the introduction of Graphical User Interface 
(GUI) based operating systems by Microsoft and others in place of computers with only command line 
interface, like UNIX or DOS. Around 1990s, the growth of World Wide Web (WWW) further accelerated 
mass usage of computers and thereafter computers have become an indispensable part of everyday 
life.
Further, with the introduction of laptops, personal computing was made portable to a great extent. 
This was  followed  by  smartphones,  tablets  and  other personal digital assistants. These 
devices have leveraged the  technological  advancements  in  processor miniaturisation, faster 
memory, high speed data and connectivity mechanisms.
The  next  wave  of  computing  devices  includes the wearable gadgets, such as smart watch, 
lenses, headbands, headphones, etc. Further, smart appliances are becoming a part of the Internet 
of Things (IoT), by leveraging the power of Artificial Intelligence (AI).
1.3 computer memory
A computer system needs memory to store the data and instructions for processing. Whenever we talk 
about the ‘memory’ of a computer system, we usually talk about the main or primary memory. The 
secondary memory (also called storage device) is used to store data, instructions and results 
permanently for future use.
1.3.1 Units of Memory
A computer system uses binary numbers to store and process data. The binary digits 0 and 1, which 
are the basic units of memory, are called bits. Further, these bits are grouped together to form 
words. A 4-bit word is called a Nibble. Examples of nibble are 1001, 1010, 0010, etc. A two nibble 
word, i.e., 8-bit word is called a byte, for example, 01000110, 01111100, 10000001, etc. Like any 
other standard unit, bytes are grouped together to make bigger chunks or units of memory.
Table 1.1 shows different measurement units for digital data stored in storage devices.


2021-22


COMPUTER SCIE;NCE; — CLASS XI

Table 1.1 Measurement units for digital data

KB (Kilobyte)  1 KB = 1024 Bytes PB (Petabyte)  1 PB = 1024 TB MB (Megabyte) 1 MB = 1024 KB  EB 
(Exabyte)  1 EB = 1024 PB GB (Gigabyte)  1 GB = 1024 MB  ZB (Zettabyte) 1 ZB = 1024 EB TB 
(Terabyte)  1 TB = 1024 GB   YB (Yottabyte) 1 YB = 1024 ZB

1.3.2 Types of Memory
Human beings memorise many things over a lifetime, c recall from memory to make a decision or some 
acti However, we do not rely on our memory completely, c
we make notes and store important data and i    kO
using other media, suc, as notebook, manual}
document, etc. Simi  y, computers have  o t  s of
memory — prima     er    '


Primary me,
computer  'st    gram
primary       ore pr   ’n
direc  with   rimary
write  erati  ?It is of t  t  s
) and (ii) earn
o   rent of a a a    •d into the I interacts
m read or cm Access DM).


e
RAM a
while t
is star d
req
g as the power is supplied r a'i  he data in it. But as soon
:urned off, all the contents of used to store data temporarily rking. Whenever the computer 
application is launched, the data are loaded into RAM











e th
c  up
t  econdary
Can we install
a   re on that
cor..p  . .
essing. HAM is usually referred to as main and it is faster than the secondary memory or
stora ’e devices.
On the other hand, ROM is non-volatile, which eans its contents are not lost even when the power is 
turned off. It is used as a small but faster permanent storage for the contents which are rarely 
changed. For example, the startup program (boot loader) that loads the operating system into 
primary memory, is stored
in ROM.
(B} Cache ñ emory
RAM is faster than secondary storage, but not as fast as a computer processor. So, because of RAM, 
a CPU

2021-22


C OMPUTER


may have to slow down. To speed up the operations of the CPU, a very high speed memory is placed 
between the CPU and the primary memory known as cnche. It stores the copies of the data from 
frequently accessed primary memory locations, thus, reducing the average time required to access 
data from primary memory. When the CPU needs some data, it first examines the cache. In case the 
requirement is met, it is read from the cache, otherwise the primary memory is accessed.
(C) Secon‹fciry Memory
Primary memory has limited storage capacity and is either volatile RAM or read-only (ROM). Thus, a 
computer system needs auxiliary or secc     ory to permanently store the data or ir
future use. The secondary memory is n has larger storage capacity than prime is slower and cheaper 
than the main i cannot be accessed directly by th
secondary storage need to be first    t i o tne main
memory for the CPU to access  xamp   second memory devices include Hard  isk D ive (HDD) DVD, 
Memory Card, etc., a      igure 1.
However, these day





p

Pen  Hard Disk Drive





ve  Memory
Card




Tape Drive

devices like SSD which :  o speed as compared to ea between comp
to the availab pen drives.

1.4 DATA TRANSFER BE
Data need to be trans
r
d    sfer
due
1 OP



and





Solid State Drive
(SSD)

Figure 1.T: Storage deinces
is between the primary and

ween different components of Physical wires called bus. For lata transfer between a USB ween a hard 
disk and main pes— (i) Data bus to transfer
b          iponents, (ii) Address bus to
ns       'n CPU and main memory. T              ' location that the CPU wants pecified in the 
address bus,

2021-22

8   COMPUTER S CIDNCD — CLASS XI



CPU

Memory





Address bus

Input and Output
and (iii) Control bus to communicate control  signals  between  different components of a computer. 
All these three buses collectively  make the system bus, as shown in Figure 1.8.
As the CPU interacts directly with main memory, any data entered from input device or the data to 
be accessed from hard disk needs to be placed in the main memory for further processin

Figure 1.8: Data transfer between components through
system bus
The data is then transferred betw
CPU and main memory using bus.
The CPU places on the address bus, the   e  o the main memory loca  n from which it wa ts  re data 
or to write dat   hile executing the  s  c  ns, the CPU specifies th re  r write co tro i  l  rough 
the control bus
As the C U      ire t  r     a rom main memory o  ri    a to main   mo  ,  data bus is bidirecti n  
 ut  e control  s    ddress bus are unidi  tion    write d  a i    emory, the CPU place the d  a on 
the d      hich is then written to  e  e  c addres  pr  ’de  through the address
s.  case of rea  o  a  n, the CPU specifies the
, and the  a  is  ced on the data bus by a d  ’cated har     11e  memory controller. The memory 
contr  r manages the flow of data into and out of the compu  's main memory.

1. 5    P  CENSORS
r    ys, a computer's CPU used to occupy a large ro  o  multiple cabinets. However, with 
advancement in te  nology, the physical size of CPU has reduced and ‘t is now possible to place a 
CPU on a single microchip nly. A processor {CPU) which is implemented on a single microchip is 
called microprocessor. Nowadays, almost all the CPUs are microprocessors. Hence, the terms are used 
synonymously for practical purpose.
Microprocessor is a small-sized electronic component inside a computer that carries out various 
tasks involved in data processing as well as arithmetic and logical operations. These days, a 
microprocessor is built over an integrated circuit comprising millions of small components like 
resistors, transistors and diodes.

2021-22


C OMPUTER SYISTEM   9
Microprocessors have evolved over time in terms of their increased processing capability, 
decreasing physical size and reduced cost. Currently available microprocessors are capable of 
processing millions of instructions per millisecond. Table 1.2 lists different types of 
microprocessors along with their generation, time period, and underlying technology since their 
inception in early 1970s.
Table 1.2 Generations of Microprocessor

First
1971-73 LSI  4 /  1 KB
bit
108
KHz
Single
OO
4     6 Sin

13  S

86
68030

Xeon






sp







(B) Memory Sz
eci  a  s
e         f
1









S





(C  I

(s a
S1

eezf

size of microproce of different genera are given at Tabl‹
›f the terms


2021-22

10    COMPUTER S CIDNCD — CLASS XI




Find out the clock speed of the microprocessor of your computer arid compare with that of your 
peers?
clock inside a computer. The clock speed indicates the speed at which the computer can execute 
instructions. Earlier, it was measured in Hertz (Hz) and Kilohertz
{kHz). But with advancement in technology and chip density, it is now measured in Gigahertz (GHz), 
i.e., billions of pulses per second.
(D) Cores
Core is a basic computation unit of the CPU. Earlier processors had only one computation unit, 
thereby capable of performing only one task at a time. With t advent of multicore processor, it has 
become possi for the computer to execute multiple task , t  e increasing the system's performance. 
CPU
four, and eight cores  alled dual-core, qu  c  and octa-core processor   ectively.
1.5.2 Microco  o  rs
The microco  ro   is  small     n  evice which has a CP  a  xe  mount of   M,  OM and other periph  
s  e   dded on a     ip as compared to mi  oproce   that has  ly   PU on the chip. The st uc  re of 
 microco   e   hown in Figure 1.9. Ke  o    ouse, w  ing  achine, digital camera, e, remote co   l  
 icrowave are few examples
ic ocontroll r .     are designed for specific
ta  only, he e t   ize as well as cost is reduced.
Because  of the very small size of the micr  ntrolle , it is embedded in another device or    to 
perform a specific functionality. For

Clock   CPU

Bus System

Input
I/ O-por

Memo




On  t
the microcontroller in a fully automatic wa ing machine is used to control the washing cycle out 
any human intervention. The cycle starts with the filling of water, after which the clothes are 
soaked and washed; thereafter the water is drained and the clothes are spin dry. The simple use of 
microcontroller has permitted repetitive execution

Figure  . Structure of micro  ir ler
of tedious tasks automatically without any human intervention, thereby saving precious time.

1.6  DATA AND INFORMATION
A computer is primarily for processing data. A computer system considers everything as data, be it 
instructions, pictures, songs, videos, documents, etc. Data can also be

2021-22


C OMPUTER SYSTEM   11

raw and unorganised facts that are processed to get meaningful information.
So understanding the concept of data along with its different types is crucial to understand the 
overall functioning of a computer. Sometimes people use the terms data, information and knowledge 
interchangeably, which is incorrect.
1.6.1 Data and Its Types
A computer system has many input devices, which provide it with raw data in the form of facts, 
concepts, instructions, etc., Internally everything is stored in binary form (0 arid 1), but 
externally, data can be input to a computer in the text form consisting of  glish alphabets A—Z, 
a—z, numerals 0 —9, and speci   bols like @, #, etc. Data can be input in other 1   ag  oo or it 
can be read from the files. The i  t   may be from different sources, hence it   b   di erent 
formats. For example, an image is  c  cti  of Red, Green, Blue (RGB) pixels, a vid   m  e  of 
frames, and a fee receipt is made of n  eric n non-numer characters. Primarily, ther  re  ree  pes 
of da
(A} Structurecf Data
Data which follows a stri  ec  structure   i e
to comprehend is called stru  red data.  c    with pre-specified ta    rmat may be stor  ’n a data 
file to access in th f tur . Table 1.3 sh ws str  tured data related to mon     ndance o s  ents 
maintained by the school.
Table 1.3 Structure  ata Monthly attendance records of students


R1           han
R2       an
R3     Sheen
R      Geet
R5     Anita
Mohan
2      Sohan
Sheen
4      Geet
R5      Anita
May            95
May             75
May            92
May            82
May            97
July            98
July            65
July             85
July            94
July             85
2021-22

12    COMPUTER S CIDNCD — CLASS XI

Can you give some more  examples  of unstructured data?

It is clear that such data is organised in row/column format arid is easily understandable. 
Structured data may be sorted in ascending or descending order. In the example, attendance data is 
sorted in increasing order on the column ‘month’. Other examples of structured data include sales 
transactions, online railway ticket bookings, ATM transactions, etc.
(B) £fnstructiire‹f Deter
Data which are not organised in a pre-defined record format is called unstructured data. Examples 
inclu audio and video files, graphics, text documents, so media posts, satellite images, etc. 
Figure 1.  s  s report card with month  attendance record de  s s  t to parents. Such dat  re 
unstructured as  ey  sist of textual content  s  11 as graphic     o not follow a specific   at.




School Logo
ABC SCHOO
Wen  nce record for be   th  uIy

Name: J n S.

Tot  a  he1  50


G  ian's Signature
Roll - R1

te  d: o
Class: XI A

Absent:50


Principal's Signature

Figure 1. 10: Unst  tured data: Monthly attendance record

(C) Se   I  ctu.red Data
have no well-defined structure but m  ta s internal tags or markings to separate data elem  s are 
called semi-structured data. Examples ‘nclude email document, HTML page, comma separated alues {csv 
file), etc. Figure 1. l l shows an example of semi-structured data containing student's month-wise 
attendance details. In this example, there is no specific
format for each attendance

Name: Mo  rt     th: defy  Class: XI    Attendance: 98 Name:         nth: July   Class: XI   
Attendance: 65 Name:  een   Month: defy   Class: XI   Attendance: 85 N          Month: Any   Class: 
XI   Attendance: 82 me.  eet    Month: defy   Class: XI   Attendance: 94
igur 1. 1 1: Semi-structured data: Month-size total
attendance record maintained by the school

2021-22
record. Here, each data value is preceded by a tag (Name, Month, Class, Attendance) for the 
interpretation of the data value while processing.


C OMPUTER SYSTEM   13


1.6.2 Data Capturing, Storage and Retrieval
To process data, we need to first input or capture the data. This is followed by its storage in a 
file or a database so that it can be used in the future. Whenever data is to be processed, it is 
first retrieved from the file or database so that we can perform further actions on it.
(A) Data Cn turinp
It involves the process of gathering data from different sources in the digital form. This 
capturing may vary from simple instruments like keyboard, barcode readers used at shopping outlets 
(Figure 1.12), comments or posts over social media, remote sensors on an earth orbiting satellite, 
etc. Sometimes, heterogeneit  mong data sources makes data capturing a compl
(B) Data Stornpe
It is the process of storing the ca t      for processing later. Now-a-days data is  in   duced at 
a very high rate, and therefore data    e h  become a challenging task. However, t   ec  s  n the 
cost of digital storage devices ha  helpe    simplifyi this task. There are nume  u  igit  storage 
available in the market 1‘ e a  h   in Figure
Data keeps on inc      ’th time.    e,  e storage devices also requir   be upgrade   o  al . In 
large organi   ns, co  puters    1   r and faster storage   d  ta servers are dep  ed to store vast 
amount o   t   uch dedi    computers help in processing d    ciently. H   e  the cost (both 
hardware and software)  s      a data server as well as its maintenance i  ig  especially for small 
organisations and startups.
(C} Data Retrieval
It involves fete ’n  ta f m the storage devices, for its processing as   the  er requirement. As 
databases grow, the challeng   volved in search and retrieval of the data   cceptable time, also 
increase. Minimising data access   is crucial for faster data processing.
1.6.3  ata  e1etion and Recovery
O   t  iggest threats associated with digital data is i  ele on. The storage devices can 
malfunction or crash do  resulting in the deletion of data stored. Users can

2021-22



Visit some of the places like bank, automobile showroom,  shopping mall, tehsil office, etc., and 
find out 2-3 names of tools or instruments used to capture data in digital format.







dot   si   or   e reader


COMPUTER SCIE;NCE; — CLASS XI




Explore possible ways of recovering deleted data or data from a corrupted device.
accidentally erase data from storage devices, or a hacker or malware can delete the digital data 
intentionally.
Deleting digitally stored data means changing the details of data at bit level, which can be very 
time- consuming. Therefore, when any data is simply deleted, its address entry is marked as free, 
and that much space is shown as empty to the user, without actually deleting the data.
In case data gets deleted accidentally or corrupted, there arises a need to reco
data is possible only if thi
marked as deleted have n           b
other data. Data reco w_
deleted,  corrupted   d              ap
storage devices.
There are c              e

with data. O e
f’
l‹
s   rns a
by's nip    eas to me    t
rds    ser acc
e. Th e*is also




° and
›in


u hav vity 1.4.
nte  odification.
y  d to unwanted recovery of i  r software. Many a times,
o1   en or malfunctioning storage re to delete data. We assume meted files are permanently
›e storage devices fall into the
a           ers, they can easily recover this poses a threat to data
•m can be mitigated by using proper tools to delete or shred data before disposing off ny old or 
faulty storage device.
1.7 SomwaRE
Till    we have studied  about the physical components or the hardware of the computer system. But 
the hardware is of no use on its own. Hardware needs to be operated by a set of instructions. These 
sets of instructions are referred to as software. It is that component of a computer system, which 
we cannot


2021-22


C OMPUTER SYSTEM   15


touch or view physically. It comprises the instructions and data to be processed using the computer 
hardware. The computer software and hardware complete any task together.
The software comprises a set of instructions which on execution deliver the desired outcome. In 
other words, each software is written for some computational purpose. Some examples of software 
include operating systems like Ubuntu or Windows 7/10, word processing tool like LibreOffice or 
Microsoft Word, video player like VLC Player, photo editors like GIMP and LibreOffice draw. A 
document or image stored on the hard disk or pen drive is referred to as a soft-copy. Once printed, 
the document or an image is called a hard-copy.
1.7.1 Need of Software
The sole purpose of a software is to mak  e omp  er hardware useful and operational. A so  a     
how to make different hardware compo  ts f  omputer work and communicate with eac    as  el1 as 
with the end-user. We cannot ins  ct th   dware of computer directly. Software ct  s an  terface be 
  n human users and the hard  e.
Depending on the m     raction wit
and functions to be perfor   t  software     a classified into three categori  Liz. (i) S  e    
ware,
(ii) Programmi   o  nd (iii) Applicatio  oftware.
1.7.2 System
The software th  provides th    c functionality to operate a computer b   e   g directly with its 
constituent hardware is te  ed  system software. A system software knows how to  erate and use 
different hardware componen   computer. It provides services directly to the e   se  or to some 
other software. Examples of sys  s   re include operating systems, system utilities, d   drivers, 
etc.
(A) Oper   g System
As the      lies, the operating system is a system softw  e   t operates the computer. An operating 
sy      e most basic system software, without ie  t er software cannot work. The operating system
ag s other application programs and provides


2021-22











Hardware r    e
physical com  ent of the com  er  tern whig ca     nd
t  ch   or e  ple,
M,   ard,
t  m itor, CPU, tc.   e other hand,
so  are is a set of
ctions and data that makes hardware functional to complete
the desired task.


COMPUTER SCIE;NCE; — CLASS XI

access and security to the users of the system. Some of the popular operating systems are Windows, 
Linux, Macintosh, Ubuntu, Fedora, Android, iOS, etc.
(B} System £ftilities
Software used for maintenance and configuration of the computer system is called system utility. 
Some system utilities are shipped with the operating system for example disk defragmentation tool, 
formatting utility, system restore utility, etc. Another set of utilities are those which are not 
shippe
but are required to impr‹ system, for example, anti-’ tool, disk compression pft
C}



Ask your teacher to help you locate any two device drivers installed
As the name signifi
ensure proper    nin b
it comes to       or
the opera    st  does
devices       énts ar    g syste  ? It is   ossible fo
toop ate all  he existi
i  ri
r v’
o u









ser


ti
its“  vi
The device
iverse c  ac  istics. The responsibility
and management of a
e   ware level is delegated to

as an interface between the system. It provides required
•s by hiding the details erations performed at the hardware level of the device. Just



App1ic.
User Interface

rogramming tools

res

tern




Hardware
like a language translator, a device driver acts as a mediator between the operating system and the
¿ attached device. The categorisation
• of software is shown in Figure 1.13.
1.7.3 Programming Tools
In order to get some work done by the computer, we need to give instructions which are applied on 
the input data to get the desired outcome. Computer languages are developed

Figure 1. 13: Cntesorisotion of:sofimare
for writing these instructions.

2021-22





It is important to understand here that computers and humans understand completely different 
languages. While humans are able to write programs in high-level language, computers understand 
machine language. There is a continuous need for conversion from high level to machine level 
language, for which translators are needed. Also, to write the instruction, code editors (e.g., 
IDLE in Python) are needed. We will briefly describe here the programming languages, language 
translators arid program development tools.
(A} Clnssi cntion o/Proprnmminp 2mnpunpes
It is very difficult for a human being to write instructions in the form of 1s and 0s. So different 
types of computer programming languages are devel  d to simplify the coding. Two major categories 
of   puter programming languages are low-level law  ag  and high-level languages.
Low-levellanguagesare machine dep       ages and include machine language and  e b  anguage. 
Machine language uses 1s and 0s t   e i s ructions which are directly understoo  nd    ed by t e 
computer. But writing a code  mac i e langua e difficult as one has to re     a  operatio  o and 
machine addresses  so   i g errors in th  o written in machine lan      ficult.
To simplify the writing  code, asse    a  a e was developed t   lowed usage of En  h-   words and 
symbols   ea  of 1s and 0s. B  one major drawback of w     ode in thi   guage is that the code is 
compute    ific, i.e., t   d written for one type of CPU cannot be us d       type of CPU.
High level languages a   ac ine independent and are simpler to write code in   structions are using 
English like senten   nd each high level language follows a set of ru s,   ilar to natural 
languages. However, these  n    are not directly understood by the computer.   ce, translators are 
needed to translate  gh-level  language  codes into machine langua      les of high level language 
include C++, Java,  t  , e c.
(B      ge Translators
t  computer can understand only machine la  age, a translator is needed to convert program writ n 
in assembly or high level language to machine

2021-22
C OMPUTER SYSTEM   17
NoTES

18    COMPUTER SCIENCE — CLASS XI


Code in high level language
(Source Code)








Code in machine language
(Object Code)







Language translater

language. The program code written in assembly or high-level language is called source code. The 
source code is converted by a translator into the machine understandable form called object 
(machine) code as depicted in Figure 1.14.
As we have different types of computer languages, different translators are needed to convert the 
source code to machine code. The three types of translators used in computing systems are 
assembler, compiler and interpreter.
The translator used to convert the code writ

Figure 1. 14: Translator to convert source code into object code
in assembly language to machine language is  1 aBBeinbler. Each assembler can understand   pe  c 
microprocessor inst   ion set only and  n   the machine code is n    able.     Y
We also nee   nsla  s to co  rt  d   ritten in high  level       (source  co     machine understan  
 le    (machin    e    xecution by the comp    om  ler conve ts  e  urce code into mach’  co   I  e 
code f 11o  a  syntactic rules of the 1  guage t en it is exec  d  the computer. Once t  s  d  e 
compil  is  t  eeded.
n erpreter tr s  s  e line at a time instead of e   e progra  a  e  Interpreter takes one line, co  
erts it into  e  t  e code if the line is syntactically correct, and th  it repeats these steps for 
all lines in the source code.  ence, interpreter is always needed
whenev   ource code is to be executed.
C)       Det›eIopment Tools
ene r we decide to write a program, we need a text edi   n editor is a software that allows us to 
create a text fi e where we type instructions and store the file as e source code. Then an 
appropriate translator is used
o get the object code for execution. In order to simplify the program development, there are 
software called Integrated Development Environment (IDE) consisting of text editor, building tools 
and debugger. A program can be typed, compiled and debugged from the IDE directly. Besides Python 
IDLE, Netbeans, Eclipse, Atom, Lazarus are few other examples of IDEs. Debugger, as the name 
implies, is the software to detect and correct errors in the source code.

2021-22

C OMPUTER SYSTEM   19

1.7.4 Application Software
The system software provides the core functionality of the computer system. However, different 
users need the computer system for different purposes depending upon their requirements. Hence, a 
new category of software is needed to cater to different requirements of the end- users. This 
specific software that works on top of the system software is termed as application software. There 
are again two broad categories of application software —
With the help of your teacher, install one application software in your computer.
f a

s      a
in
IS

e.
(Zf} Customisecf So/tit›nre
a  a         a
e      S
a.         0




























2021-22

20   COMPUTER S CIDNCD — CLASS XI

source code may not be available. Such software are called freeware. Examples of freeware are 
Skype, Adobe

When a computer is
turned on, who brings the OS into RAM from the secondary storage?

















Command-based Interface



Graphical Interf



Touch—based Interface



Voice—b Interface



Ges re-based terface

Fig  1. 1 5: Types of user
interface of OF
Reader, etc. When the software to be used has to be purchased from the vendor who has the copyright 
of the software, then it is a proprietary software. Examples of proprietary software include 
Microsoft Windows, Tally, Quickheal, etc. A software can be freeware or open source or proprietary 
software depending upon the terms and conditions of the person or group who has developed and 
released that software.

1. 8 OPERATINo SYSTEM
An operating system  S) can be considere   b resource manager w   manages all the r  urc  of a 
computer, i.e., its  r  re includin I  ,    Disk, Network and ot    ut-  tput devi    1s  ontrols 
various appli a     re and dev’   ’ve , manages system se  it a  handles a  s  di ferent users. It 
is the     p r ant syste  s   e. Examples of popu  OS    indows,  in  A droid, Macintosh and  on.
h  i  ry objec  es  an operating system are
d. he first is     services for building and n   applicati   r   s. When an application
p  am need  o   ri, it is the operating system which loads t  program into memory and allocates it 
to the CPU for  ecution. When multiple application progra   ed to be run, the operating system 
decides the ord  f  e execution.
e ond objective of an operating system is to pr ‘de n interface to the user through which the user 
can  teract with the computer. A user interface is a oftware component which is a part of the 
operating ystem and whose job is to take commands or inputs from a user for the operating system to 
process.
1.8.1 OS User Interface
There are different types of user interfaces each of which provides a different functionality. Some 
commonly used interfaces are shown in Figure 1.15.
(NJ Commcincf-f›cisecf Enter/cice
Command-based interface requires a user to enter the commands to perform different tasks like 
creating,
2021-22





opening, editing or deleting a file, etc. The user has to remember the names of all such programs 
or specific commands which the operating system supports.
The primary input device used by the user for command based interface is the keyboard. Command 
based interface is often less interactive and usually allows a user to run a single program at a 
time.
Examples of operating systems with command-based interface include MS-DOS and Unix.
(B) Graphical User Interface
Graphical User Interface (GUI) lets users run programs or give instructions to the computer in the 
form of icons, menus and other visual options. Icons usually represent files and programs stored on 
the computer and windows represent running programs that the user has launched through the 
operating system.
The input devices used to interact with the GUI commonly  include  the  mouse  and  the  keyboard. 
Examples of operating systems with GUI interfaces include  Microsoft  Windows,  Ubuntu,  Fedora  
and Macintosh, among others.
(C) Touch-based Interface
Today smartphones, tablets and PCs allow users to interact with the system simply using the touch 
input. Using the touchscreen, a user provides inputs to the operating system, which are interpreted 
by the OS as commands like opening an app, closing an app, dialing a number, scrolling across apps, 
etc.
Examples of popular operating systems with touch- based interfaces are Android and iOS. Windows
8.1 and 10 also support touch-based interfaces on touchscreen devices.
(D) Voice-based Interface
Modern computers have been designed to address the needs of all types of users including people 
with special needs and people who want to interact with computers or smartphones while doing some 
other task. For users who cannot use the input devices like the mouse, keyboard, and touchscreens, 
modern operating systems provide other means of human-computer interaction. Users today can use 
voice-based commands to make a computer work in the desired way. Some operating
Computer SyStem    21
noteS
2021-22

22     Computer SCienCe – ClaSS xi


























Operating system is called resource manager as it manages different resources like main memory, 
CPU, I/O devices, so that each resource is used optimally
and system performance does not deteriorate.

systems which provide voice-based control to users include iOS (Siri), Android (Google Now or “OK 
Google”), Microsoft Windows 10 (Cortana) and so on.
(E) Gesture-based Interface
Some smartphones based on Android and iOS as well as laptops let users interact with the devices 
using gestures like waving, tilting, eye motion and shaking. This technology is evolving faster and 
it has promising potential for application in gaming, medicine and other areas.
1.8.2 Functions of Operating System
Now let us explore the important services and tasks that an operating system provides for managing 
the computer system.
(A) Process Management
While a computer system is operational, different tasks are running simultaneously. A program is 
intended to carry out various tasks. A task in execution is known as process. We can activate a 
system monitor program that provides information about the processes being executed on a computer. 
In some systems it can be activated using Ctrl+Alt+Delete. It is the responsibility of operating 
system to manage these processes and get multiple tasks completed in minimum time. As CPU is the 
main resource of computer system, its allocation among processes is the most important service of 
the operating system. Hence process management concerns the  management  of  multiple  processes,  
allocation of required resources, and exchange of information among processes.
(B) Memory Management
Primary or main memory of a computer system is usually limited. The main task of memory management 
is to give (allocate) and take (free) memory from running processes. Since there are multiple 
processes running at a time, there arises a need to dynamically (on-the-go) allocate and free 
memory to the processes. Operating system should do it without affecting other processes that are 
already residing in the memory and once the process is finished, it is again the responsibility of 
the operating system to take the memory space back for re-

2021-22





utilisation. Hence, memory management concerns with management of main memory so that maximum 
memory is occupied or utilised by large number of processes while keeping track of each and every 
location within the memory as free or occupied.
(C) Pile Zfnnnpement
Data and programs are stored as files in the secondary storage of a computer system. File 
management involves the creation, updation, deletion and protection of these files in the secondary 
memory. Protection is a crucial function of an operating system, as multiple users can access and 
use a computer system. There must be a mechanism in place that will stop users from ac  sing files 
that belong to some other user and hav   been shared with them. File management syst  ma  es 
secondary memory, while memory mana me  sys m handles the main memory of a comp  r  em.
(D) Device Management
A computer system has many I/  devi    d hardw  e connected to it. Operating   stem  anages t es 
heterogeneous devices th  a  in  depende operating system intera   i  he evice driver a  t related 
software for a p      evice. T  o  ra  g system must also provide  e options f      ri g a 
particular dev‘   o that i may be   d   an end user or some   r d  ice. Just like files,  evices 
also need security   s  s and th   cess to different devices must b    icted by t   e  ting system 
to the authorised users, soft a      r hardware only.


• A computing d ice also referred as computer, processes t      ta as per given instructions to 
generate  ’re output.
• Com    syste  has four physical components Liz. (i)  U, (ii) Primary Memory, (iii) Input Device 
an     put Devices. They are referred to as h  wa  of computer.
•     er system has two types of primary me ories Liz. (i) RAM, the volatile memory and ”) ROM, the 
non-volatile memory.

2021-22
C OMPUTER SYSTEM   23
NoTES

24    COMPUTER S CIDNCD — CLASS XI

• System bus is used to transfer data, addresses and control signals between components of the 
computer system.
• A microprocessor is a small-sized electronic component inside a computer that performs basic 
arithmetic and logical operations on data.
•  Microcontroller is a small computing device which has a CPU, a fixed amount of RAM, ROM and 
other peripherals embedded on a single chip.
• Software is a set of instructions written to achiev the desired tasks and are mainly categoris as 
system software, programming t 1s application software
• Hardware of a co  ter cannot function  its  n. It needs softwa  t  operational  f  i a1.
•  Operating s    is a  ’nterface  t    e user and the  o      d superv‘     orking of compu  s st  
, i.e., it mo  rs   ontrols the hardw    d o ware of  e    ter system.

E  SE
e the soft  e   red to make a computer tional. W e o   s two primary services.
2.  ow doe  he   puter understand a program written in h  level language?
3. Wh   e execution time of the machine code less th   a  f source code?
t  the need of RAM? How does it differ from
o ?
5.  at is the need for secondary memory?
How do different components of the computer communicate with each other?
7. Draw the block diagram ofa computer system. Briefly write about the functionality of each 
component.
8. What is the primary role of system bus? Why is data bus is bidirectional while address bus is 
unidirectional?
9. Differentiate between proprietary software and freeware software. Name two software for each 
type.

2021-22


C OMPUTER SYSTEM   25

10. Write the main difference between microcontroller and microprocessor. Why do smart home 
appliances have a microcontroller instead of microprocessor embedded in them?
11. Mention the different types of data that you deal with while browsing the Internet.
12. Categorise the following data as structured, semi- structured and unstructured:
Newspaper
Cricket Match Score
• HTML Page
• Patient records in a hospital
13. Name the input or output device i       ie following:
a) To output audio
b) To enter textual data
c) To make hard copy of a text
d) To display the data or i   a  n
e) To enter audio-based c
f) To build 3D models
g) To assist     11
entering data
14. Identify  the  catego
programmi    of the f
a) Compil
b) Assemb
c) Ubuntu
d) Text editor


EXPR.E]RK E]IIRsEI.F
ac
d



h
a

Ip you locate any two device ir computer.
software and two application our computer.
5oes your personal computer n does it belong to?
1 of your microprocessor?
in your school or home that

2021-22

26    COMPUTER S CIDNCD — CLASS XI

6. Check the size of RAM and HDD of a computer in your school. Make a table and write their size in 
Bytes, Kilobytes, Megabytes and Gigabytes.
7. List all secondary storage devices available at your school or home.
8. Which operating system is installed on your computer at home or school?

































2021-22
